h1. Google Analytics App

h2. About

This app is designed to showcase a few variations on how to implement Google Tag Manager for Google Analytics in an Angular app, in this case powered by Ruby on Rails.

I built most of this on a holiday weekend to better understand some of the challenges my team’s engineers might face and to validate some of our hypotheses about how the tools might fit together.

This README reads like a how-to guide from bottom up, so skip to "Installing Google Tag Manager >>" for details on a recommended reference implementation for Google Tag Manager & Analytics.


h2. Dependencies

h3. v1
* Google Tag Manager
* Google Analytics
* Ruby on Rails
* Angular v6
* Heroku (for deployment)
* PostgreSQL (for local development)

h3. v2

* Google Firebase (linked to Google Analytics)

h2. How it was made

This app was created using Ruby v2.6.5 and Rails v6.0.2

h3. Create the Rails App

h4. Initialization

First, we'll create the Rails app with a few settings optimized for easy deployment to Heroku (PostgreSQL) and with settings to set us up to work with Angular out-of-the-box (Webpack):

bc. rails new analytics --database=postgresql --webpack=angular

I had just updated my OS X box to Catalina, so I had to get Homebrew to relink some commands for yarn. The clue came in the form of this message at the bottom of the command's output:

bc. * bin/rails: Spring inserted
       rails  webpacker:install
Yarn not installed. Please download and install Yarn from https://yarnpkg.com/lang/en/docs/install/

I then re-ran the @bundle:install@ portion, adding the @angular@ option to get the library-specific goodness (this would have been done by default if yarn had been configured correctly from the get go):

bc. cd analytics && rails webpacker:install:angular

h4. What You Get for Free

Now you can find a few items located in the @app/javascript@ directory:
* hello_angular/
** app/
*** app.component.ts
* packs/
** hello_angular.js

Rails has set up a default Angular component for us here in @app.component.ts@ with a selector defined as @hello-angular@:

bc. @Component({
  selector: 'hello-angular',
  template: `<h1>Hello {{name}}</h1>`
})

Inside @hello_angular.js@ we find our first clue on how to get our Angular code working inside of a rails view:

bc. // Run this Angular example by adding the following HTML markup to your view:
//
// <hello-angular>Loading...</hello-angular>
//
// <%= javascript_pack_tag 'hello_angular' %>

h4. Get ready for showtime

We'll now use that clue about how to style our view to create our first web-accessible route. We'll create a new singleton controller that's connected to a single view:

bc. rails g controller hello_angular index

Which, of course, creates a route to @/hello_angular@ from our app route and links it up to @app/views/hello_angular/index.html.erb@, which we can then edit to include the text from the hint above:

bc. <hello-angular>Loading...</hello-angular>
<%= javascript_pack_tag 'hello_angular' %>

Now let's check out the magic by starting the server:

bc. rails server

And heading over to "http://localhost:3000/hello_angular/index":http://localhost:3000/hello_angular/index

h4. Cleanup to enforce MVC

If you're like me and chose Rails for MVC, you'll probably have a predisposition to want the HTML that currently lives in the @template@ property of the @Component@ components in @app.components.ts@ to be pulled out. That can be accomplished site-wide in a few steps which are purely in the webpack world:

Note: These steps have been copied from the helpful details in the "TypeScript README for Webpacker":https://github.com/rails/webpacker/blob/master/docs/typescript.md#html-templates-with-typescript-and-angular

First, let's add the @html-loader@ pakcage as a dependency:

bc. yarn add html-loader

Then, we'll edit the @environment.js@ for Webpack to include a special handler for HTML files in each webpack app directory, @config/webpack/environment.js@:

bc. environment.loaders.append('html', {
  test: /\.html$/,
  use: [{
    loader: 'html-loader',
    options: {
      minimize: true,
      removeAttributeQuotes: false,
      caseSensitive: true,
      customAttrSurround: [ [/#/, /(?:)/], [/\*/, /(?:)/], [/\[?\(?/, /(?:)/] ],
      customAttrAssign: [ /\)?\]?=/ ]
    }
  }]
})

And add HTML as an extension in the Webpacker (Rails) config, @config/webpacker.yml@:

bc. extensions:
    - .elm
    - .coffee
    - .html

And in our app, we'll declare how HTML files are to be handled when processed, by adding @html.d.ts@ to the app root at @app/javascript/hello_angular@:

bc. declare module "*.html" {
  const content: string
  export default content
}

Now, we'll move the markup to a new file in the @hello_angular/app@ directory, @component.html@:

bc. <h1>Hello {{name}}</h1>

And update the component to incorporate it by reference with a new variable @componentHTML@ in @app/javascript/hello_angular/app/app.component.ts@:

bc.. import { Component } from '@angular/core'
import componentHTML from './component.html'

@Component({
  selector: 'hello-angular',
  template: componentHTML
})

export class AppComponent {
  name = 'Angular!'
}

h3. Installing Google Tag Manager

h4. Obtain Tag Manager Configuration

I set up a brand new Google Tag Manager account with a single container for my demonstration app. Inside that container, I also configured two additional custom environments for use in my test and development environments, for a total of four, with "Live" (I used this one for production) and "Latest" (unused) created automatically. As a result, I have three separate sets of parameters that I will need to pass into my app.

To identify these parameters, examine the snippets provided for each environment, most clearly in the @<noscript>@ block used in the @<body>@, and you'll see parameters for (1) @id@ = GTM property ID, (2) @gtm_auth@ = proprietary authentication token, and (3) @gtm_preview@ = environment ID.

Example (obfuscated):

bc. ... ?id=GTM-XXXXXXX&gtm_auth=specialauthsecrethere&gtm_preview=env-X ...

We'll keep these values and use a new Rails 6 feature, Multi-Environment credentials, to store the values. This feature expands functionality from 5.2 that allowed for storing and sharing encrypted app secrets to support environment-specific values for these secrets.

We have to use a rails script to capture our input and then encrypt it. We'll need to do this once for each environment, for example:

bc. EDITOR="mate --wait" bin/rails credentials:edit --production

This first sets the editor that you'd like to use when Rails executes your command to edit the credentials for the Production envrionment in this case. I use TextMate as my editor, but you could use @vi@ or @nano@ just as easily--the @--wait@ option ensures that editor doesn't immediately close.

Inside the editor, I used the following configuration, which I also saved (obfuscated) into @config/credentials/credentials.yml.example@ in cleartext for posterity:

bc. google_tag_manager:
  environment_id: env-n
  id: GTM-XXXXXXX
  auth: authtexthere

h4. Add configuration to the views

My strategy for setting up Google Tag Manager and forgetting about it from a configuration standpoint was to create two partials, one for the @<head>@ snippet, and one for the @<body>@ snippet. These would be referenced from my @application.html.erb@ across the site, and a helper @#gtm_variables@ would read the config from the encrypted credential store at runtime. Here's how that looks:

I configured the helper method to read the value from the credential store in @helpers/application_helper.rb@:

bc. def gtm_variables
  # see config/credentials/credentials.yml.example
  Rails.application.credentials.google_tag_manager
end

Then, I set up my @application.html.erb@ layout to reference two partials, one for the @<head>@, and one for the @<body>@ with a variable @gtm@ passing the GTM values obtained from the @gtm_variables@ helper. Here's a snippet of @application.html.erb@:

bc.. <!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    ...
    <%= render "gtm_header", gtm: gtm_variables %>
  </head>

  <body>
    <%= render "gtm_body", gtm: gtm_variables %>
    <%= yield %>
  </body>
</html>

p. Finally, I used the properties passed into the partials to populate the dynamic values of each snippet. I created both partials in a brand new @app/views/application@ directory.

Please NOTE: the dash in @-%>@ is an ancient ERB incantation that prevents additional whitespace in the output! It's a small detail that will save you a good deal of head-scratching.

@_gtm_header.html.erb@:

bc. <!-- Google Tag Manager -->
<script>(function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start':
new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0],
j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src=
'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl+ '&gtm_auth=<%= gtm[:auth] -%>&gtm_preview=<%= gtm[:environment_id] -%>&gtm_cookies_win=x';f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f);
})(window,document,'script','dataLayer','<%= gtm[:id] -%>');</script>
<!-- End Google Tag Manager -->

@_gtm_body.html.erb@:

bc. <!-- Google Tag Manager (noscript) -->
<noscript><iframe src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=<%= gtm[:id] -%>&gtm_auth=<%= gtm[:auth] -%>&gtm_preview=<%= gtm[:environment_id] -%>&gtm_cookies_win=x"
height="0" width="0" style="display:none;visibility:hidden"></iframe></noscript>
<!-- End Google Tag Manager (noscript) -->

h4. It's showtime!

If it all worked correctly, you should now be able to return to Google Tag Manager, and turn on Debugging. When you reload your page (yes, even on localhost!), you should see a debug window that tracks the underlying page events that could be used as triggers. This is one of the easiest ways to validate the installation.

h3. Configuring Google Tag Manager

The beautiful thing about Google Tag Manager is that now, most of the heavy code-lifting is mostly done. With just the above code changes, we've enabled functionality that will meet most business needs for a while, as long as Google Tag Manager is configured properly.

Here are a few things that I learned:
* There should be one Google Analytics property configured for each environment, for a total of three
** In other words, one single Tag Manager account with a single container and three environments. Then, a single Google Analytics account with three properties, one for each environment. Inside each of these accounts, there will be exactly one stream (web) to start (see note below)
* You'll set up a few core triggers (page views, form submissions, and clicks) first
* These triggers will fire "tags" which can be configured to send events to Google Analytics. This should be configured next.
** Configure the page view tag first, and configure it as a "Google Analytics: App + Web Configuration" Tag Type. Configure it to fire a page view event and link it to the default page view event "Page View"
** Set up the "Form Submission" and "Link Click"-triggered tags next, and select that Google Analytics configuration (this means that you only configure the config once!)
* Linking environments is based on the Environment name, which is user editable!!!
** Because of this, their names should not be permitted to change or data could potentially be lost
** How to configure: Create a "Lookup Table" user-defined variable in Tag Manager that maps the Environment Name to the Measurement ID of the stream.
* Try it out by 

Note: The brand new App + Web property type is configured slightly differently than the app-only or web-only "Universal Analytics" properties. They use a Measurement ID per stream (and a property can contain multiple streams) rather than a Property ID 

h2. Resources Used

* Google Tag Manager
** "Google Tag Manager vs. Google Analytics":https://www.analyticsmania.com/post/google-tag-manager-vs-google-analytics/
** "Under the Hood: Guidance for Angular with Google Tag Manager":https://medium.com/quick-code/set-up-analytics-on-an-angular-app-via-google-tag-manager-5c5b31e6f41
** "How to use lookup tables to map GTag Environments to separate GA Instances":https://www.napkyn.com/2017/07/12/ga-gtm-environments/
* Rails Credentials Store
** "A tip to use the credentials store for GTM":https://michaelsoolee.com/google-analytics-rails-5/
** "Multi-environment credentials in Rails 6":https://blog.bigbinary.com/2019/07/03/rails-6-adds-support-for-multi-environment-credentials.html
** "Pro-tip on editor syntax for credentials:edit (Rails 5.2)":https://www.viget.com/articles/storing-secret-credentials-in-rails-5-2-and-up/
* Rails, Angular, and Webpack(er)
** "Webpacker README":https://github.com/rails/webpacker
** "Webpacker Details on README":https://github.com/rails/webpacker/blob/master/docs/typescript.md#html-templates-with-typescript-and-angular
** "Background reading on Webpacker from the 3.0 Release":https://weblog.rubyonrails.org/2017/8/30/webpacker-3-0/
* How it used to be (a.k.a. a shoutout to how hard it used to be)
** "To Deploy":https://www.codewithjason.com/deploy-rails-application-angular-cli-webpack-front-end/
** "To Develop":https://www.codewithjason.com/getting-started-with-angular-and-rails/
